# Replication Materials: "Cosmopolitans Are Nationalists Too: Territorial Identities in European Cleavage Politics"

This repository contains code and instructions to reproduce the analyses reported in the article "Cosmopolitans Are Nationalists Too: Territorial Identities in European Cleavage Politics" by Martin Lukk.

> **Abstract:** What is the relationship between global and local identification, and how is it linked to political conflict? These questions are central to scholarship on contemporary electoral politics, which has linked the radical right’s rise to a new dimension of political conflict separating tolerant, globally minded voters from exclusionary, locally oriented ones. This cleavage, variously described as universalist–particularist, cosmopolitan–parochial, or globalist–nationalist, implies that collective identification is polarized along a global–local axis and helps drive political mobilization. Yet little is known about how different territorial identities compete with or reinforce each other, let alone how their configurations shape political preferences. Using latent class models and survey data from 35 countries, I find that most Europeans are pluralists, who identify across a range of territories and support mainstream parties. A subset of countries, however, exhibits a division between particularists, who emphasize proximal identities, and expansivists, who emphasize distal ones. Remarkably, both groups converge in their strong attachment to the nation. This division overlaps with educational and geographic divides and separates radical-right supporters from those of new left parties like the Greens. The findings demonstrate how collective identities reinforce new electoral divisions while challenging influential accounts of the scope and structure of identity-based polarization.

## Instructions

To replicate the analyses reported in the study, follow the numbered steps below.

1.  Clone the repository using Git or download and unzip the folder containing the replication files (i.e., `cleavage-identity/` or `cleavage-identity-main/`) to your local disk.

### Data Acquisition

2.  This study uses publicly available survey data from the European Values Study (EVS). Download the data set listed below from the indicated source and save the relevant data file (indicated in parentheses) to the `data/input/` directory within the replication folder downloaded in Step #1.

    -   [EVS Trend File 1981-2017, Version 2.0.0](https://doi.org/10.4232/1.13736) (`ZA7503_v2-0-0.dta`)

        -   Note: the data provider has superseded this version of the data set; a copy of the version analyzed in this study is included in the repository to ensure reproducibility. If you downloaded the repository as a ZIP file, you will need to download the data file (197 MB) separately [here](https://github.com/martinlukk/cleavage-identity/blob/main/data/input/ZA7503_v2-0-0.dta) and save it in the relevant directory.

### Data Cleaning and Analysis

3.  The main directory contains a set of `R` scripts that prepare the data for analysis and perform the analyses themselves, as described below. First, open the repository as a new Project in RStudio or workspace in an IDE like Positron. Then, run `renv::restore()` in the console to install the required packages.

4.  Run the cleaning and analysis scripts in the order specified to generate `Figures 2-9` and reproduce the analyses reported in the article. Figures generated by these scripts can be found in the `figures/` subdirectory.

-   Load and clean data from EVS Wave 5 for analysis:
    -   `01-clean-evs5.R`
-   Compute summary statistics of the EVS identity variables, generate `Figure 2`:
    -   `02-plot-crosssect.R`
-   Fit multi-group LCA models to EVS data and compute item response and class membership probabilities, generate `Figure 3` and `Figure 6`:
    -   `03-fitmodels-lca.R`
-   Generate party choice variable, fit mixed-effects logistic regression models and compute marginal effects, generate `Figure 7` and `Figure 9`:
    -   `04-fitmodels-logit.R`
-   Generate matrix of country co-occurrence across multi-level LCA cluster solutions, generate `Figure 5`:
    -   `05-plot-cooccurrence.R`
-   Compute country and regional differences in class shares, generate `Figure 4` and `Figure 8:`
    -   `06-plot-countrymap.R`
    -   `07-plot-regionmap.R`

## Author Information

Please contact me at [martin.lukk\@utoronto.ca](mailto:martin.lukk@utoronto.ca) if you have questions or find any discrepancies, or submit an [issue](https://github.com/martinlukk/cleavage-identity/issues) on GitHub.